Title: Cell Phone Service for the Non-Garrulous
Date: 2009-02-21 17:09
Author: Eric
Category: Review
Slug: cell-phone-service-for-the-non-garrulous
Status: published

I'm a man of few words. Well, vocally anyway. My wife has teased that I
must have a fixed daily allotment of spoken words, and on evenings when
I'm particularly quiet, I must have used them up already. I'm not sure
if she buys the "still waters run deep" explanation, but not being much
of a talker comes in handy for getting cheap cell phone service.

My number one [complaint about cell
service]({filename}/them-newfangled-cellphone-things.md), and what kept
me from getting one until about a year ago, is that I couldn't see
paying \$40 a month for something I didn't think I'd use that much. But
then I had a look at T-Mobile's prepaid plan. I think I saw someone
mention it on a Windows Mobile forum or something, because up to that
point I had the general impression that prepaid was a way of extorting
people who didn't have good enough credit to get a "real" plan.

It turns out that T-Mobile's plan is really not bad. Unlike other
carriers' prepaid plans (cough AT&T cough) where, on top of actual
minutes used, they ding you a dollar for any day that you push the green
button, with T-Mobile, you just pay for minutes.  If you pay \$100, you
get your minutes for something like 10 cents each, and you have a year
to use them up. If you're the type of person who does casual math, you
might be saying, "A hundred bucks for 1000 minutes!?! What a rip! I get
three bajillion minutes a month for only sixty bucks!" You probably also
talk a lot.

For me, it's a great deal. I'm coming up on my one year anniversary on
this plan, and I still have... hang on while I check... 25 minutes of my
original 1000 left. That means that over the course of the year, I've
paid an average of \$8.30 a month for cell service.

I use my cell phone whenever it's convenient, but if I'm at home, I use
my land-line instead. I did need to make one adjustment mid-year when
the minutes trajectory changed drastically: when I changed jobs, my wife
didn't have easy access to my new work number and called my cell
instead. It just took putting my new work number on the home speed-dial
to fix that, though.

Now if there were just an affordable way to get a data plan...

*Author's Note: I don't work for T-Mobile, don't personally know anyone
who does, and didn't get anything for writing this posting.*
