Title: Consumed by Technology
Date: 2010-03-01 21:19
Author: Eric
Category: Story
Slug: consumed-by-technology
Status: published

Despite the fact that I earn a living with technology, and that even
many of my leisure hours are spent in front of a computer, I'm feeling
especially consumed by technology lately. By "consumed" I mean more of
the ["waste or burn away"
sense](http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/consumed).

<!--more-->
I'm beta testing a wireless music player right now. It's one
of those things that's awesome when it works -- instant access to all my
music, streaming music from Pandora, podcasts from MediaFly -- but it
unfortunately needs a lot of TLC at this stage to keep it working.
Sometimes an app (MediaFly) will take the device over and only surrender
with a factory reset. Sometimes a firmware update (which come fast and
frequent since the device is still in development) will break something
completely.

I got a Netgear ReadyNAS Duo for Christmas. It's basically a little
Linux computer with a big hard drive. I can play my music off it (see
above), use it as a print server for my home network, and send backups
to it. Again, it's pretty cool, but getting it set up was a bit of a
trick. For example, while it was fairly easy to get the print server set
up. It was not as easy to figure out how to get it set up so that print
jobs didn't have a two minute delay before they were processed.

Another Christmas gift was an LG BD390 -- a network video and Blu-Ray
player. The reviews I read were all pretty glowy, but things were rocky
right from the start. As soon as I got it set up, it said that there was
a firmware update. I couldn't, however, get it to actually download. The
wireless connection seemed extraordinarily shaky despite having a clear
line of sight to my router (maybe 25 ft away), and of all the streaming
content available, only Vudu seemed to work reliably. Of course, once I
got support on the phone, the firmware update worked right away.

After Netflix streaming worked maybe twice in fifty attempts, I got back
on the phone. It was an unpleasant experience wherein the support person
continued to proffer bat guano explanations as to why it wasn't working.
That's a metaphor, by the way. Real bat guano would probably gum things
up pretty bad as well. But I didn't take it very gracefully, so he told
me to try a wired connection and left it at that. It didn't help. It's
now waiting for FedEx to ship off on what I hope to be a quest of
self-enlightenment at the repair center.

Finally I've been trying to figure out how to manage all my passwords in
such a way that they are accessible on my Palm Pre. I've used KeePass
for years with a synchronized folder that makes the database available
at work, too. There's no client for webOS, though, and no particularly
easy way to sync the database even if there were. I looked at
[Passpack](http://passpack.com/) for a while, which I can access through
the Pre's browser, but it is kind of slow and not very mobile friendly.
I've been trying [LastPass](http://lastpass.com/) more recently since
they have a beta version of a webOS client. It doesn't quite feel right
to me, though. For one, they need desperately to get a graphic designer.
Also, the desktop application is a browser plug-in, and there are lots
of information bar prompts like the browser's built-in password manager,
only more confusing. There's a distinct loss of control. For example, I
changed my password on a site using LastPass and it didn't update the
existing site entry. Instead it created a new, uncategorized site entry
with the new password. I don't think it's going to work out.

So, I feel like I'm living this sort of meta-life. I'm not enjoying
music, I'm fiddling with the player. I'm not watching movies, I'm
arguing with tech support. I'm not visiting interesting web sites, I'm
trying to get ubiquitous access to my passwords. (I'm not sure what the
real-life activity is for a NAS. Maybe futzing with it *is* the "real"
activity.) But in spite of all this, I still find myself thinking, "How
can I get a computer into the kitchen? It'd be nice to replace my kids'
magnetic chore chart with a slick application that rotates everything
around automatically..." Maybe it's a disease of some kind.
