Title: Dell Axim X50v in a Palm User's Hands
Date: 2005-06-25 17:00
Author: Eric
Category: Review
Slug: dell-axim-x50v-in-a-palm-users-hands
Status: published

It seems like Microsoft's typical entry into a market goes something
like this. It sees an interesting market built up by someone else, and
releases a product in that space. The product is crap compared to the
existing market leader. Microsoft revs the product a few times until it
is competitive, and uses whatever means available to push it. Then, they
release something that is actually good, the former market leader starts
to crumble, and Microsoft dominates. Then, Microsoft, having won the
war, lets their product rot. Examples? Visual Studio over Borland
development tools (though Java has spurred competition again), Internet
Explorer over Netscape, Office over WordPerfect, etc.<!--more-->

I've been a long time Palm[1](#note1) user, having bought the original
Palm Pilot within days of its release, and upgrading at the watershed
devices: Palm V, Tungsten T. In the fall of 2004, my Tungsten T was
getting pretty beat up, and I was expecting great things for the next
palmOne release cycle. They put out the Tungsten T5, and it was a
supreme disappointment for me. Where was the next generation OS? Where
was the Wi-Fi support? They want *how much* for it? Then PalmSource
instills chaos and confusion with Linux and its relationship to what had
been Palm OS Cobalt. Is that crumbling I hear? I thought that Windows
Mobile devices might be getting into that competitive-to-good range
compared to Palm devices, so it was time to take a serious look. People
were raving about the Dell Axim X50v, so I took the plunge and switched
at Christmas time.

Let me be clear about something. I'm not the kind of person who trashes
all things Microsoft. I don't want to kick Bill Gates' dog or set fire
to Windows XP CDs. I even like some of Microsoft's stuff, and their
strategies are apparently pretty good business-wise. But my six months
of experience with Windows Mobile 2003 SE on the Dell Axim X50v have
been sort of disappointing.

First let me mention some of the things I've liked about my Pocket PC,
though.

-   Lots of bang-for-the-buck
-   The screen is great (but too bright at its dimmest setting for
    viewing in the dark)
-   I love having a Wi-Fi connection, and the ability to do high speed
    data exchange with my PC over it
-   I like the prospects of being able to do .NET programming for it
-   A removable battery is a nice touch
-   The first time I browsed to a web site and played a Windows Media
    file, I laughed out loud
-   I like being able to play a movie on my handheld through WMP
-   YanCEyWare Reader is a great free application for my church-going
    needs
-   I can use the original Graffiti that has disappeared from recent
    Palm devices

But I started noticing a disturbing trend. The built-in applications --
PIM apps, Pocket Word, Pocket IE, etc. all seemed really lousy. There
are painting glitches, weird behaviors, embarrassingly poor use of
screen space, seemingly arbitrary limitations and various other things
that I was unhappy about. When I'd post something about a problem on a
Pocket PC forum, some people wouldn't understand what I was talking
about. Others would say something like, "Oh, yeah. Pocket Word sucks. I
use TextMaker instead," referring to a \$50 third-party replacement
application. It's great to have options, but it's sad when you feel like
much of what came with the device needs to be replaced to get quality
applications. And some of the applications that folks rave about, like
Pocket Informant, might give you some neat features, but at the cost of
baroque feature sets and massive resource consumption.

In fact, my device was running through quicksand with Pocket Informant
installed. But then you pick up the helpful bit of advice about Windows
Mobile's not so wonderful memory management. Yeah, the idea to have
inactive applications continue running in the background doesn't work
very well. So the X50v ships with an application to thwart that behavior
and actually shut down applications when you're done with them (though I
prefer the freeware Magic Button, because a battery meter *is* kind of a
nice thing to have in the top-level UI). The odd thing is, you'll get
Pocket PC enthusiasts tittering about how Palm devices can't run
multiple processes simultaneously.

When confronting general device sluggishness for the Axim X50v, advice
is readily available about cranking up the processor's clock speed. By
default, the Axim throttles the clock speed according to what you're
doing, but you can configure it to run at full speed all the time. That
does help with performance, but it slurps power from the battery so fast
that it isn't practical for me.

Then there's ActiveSync. Even enthusiasts have [posted
comments](http://www.aximsite.com/boards/showthread.php?t=43213&highlight=activesync+must+die)
like <font size="2">"All in all, ActiveSync must die." I synchronize my
Axim with two desktop machines, which is probably the less rigorously
tested scenario, but I get a lot more errors and "unresolved items" than
I did with Palm's Hot Sync. I have a To Do item that has been like
whack-a-mole. I'd mark it complete in one place, but the other two would
keep bringing it back to life. It seems to be permanently unresolved on
my work machine. The worst aspect, though, is the utterly useless
messages ActiveSync emits when there's a problem. Even though I happen
to be pretty conversant in HRESULTs, "8004011B" isn't the lucid
explanation leading to resolution that I'd hope for. There was a sadly
comical
[posting](http://www.aximsite.com/boards/showthread.php?t=41954#post618803)
on a forum about how to get ActiveSync into a more severe error
situation so that it would finally divulge enough information to fix a
synchronization issue.</font>

The Axim's five-way navigator is another disappointment. Many
applications, including built-in ones, don't take good advantage of it,
if at all. The one-handed operation on my old Tungsten T was pretty
decent, and it's clear that some thought went into making the navigator
consistent and useful. Then you get something like Windows Media Player
on the Pocket PC, where it actually has reasonable functions mapped to
the navigator -- but there's some bug in the button settings so that
*only* the navigator works. If you want to map one of the other hardware
buttons to, say, turn off the screen while you listen to music you're
out of luck. You have to overwrite one of the navigator functions. Who
ever wants to scan backward through their play list anyway?

This one is a bit of a nit, but the close/OK button that always appears
in the upper right corner seems like a human factors experiment that got
wadded up, missed the trash, and landed in engineering. At a very
superficial level, it sounds great: Anytime you want close the current
form, just go right here! But what if you have some truly bizarre
interaction where you could dismiss a form with either an "OK" or a
"Cancel"? Application designers are faced with having a Cancel button
spatially divorced from the OK button, or creating a redundant OK button
next to Cancel where you would expect it in the first place.

So, what is one to do when neither Palm nor Microsoft satisfy? Maybe
palmOne and PalmSource are actually getting their act together with
newer offerings. Maybe Windows Mobile 5.0, to be released later this
year, will get my Axim into that as yet unrealized competitive-to-good
category. Maybe the right thing is to root for Palm, because at least as
long as they're around the product category won't stagnate under a
Microsoft monopoly.

Notes

<a id='#note1'></a>1. You know, Palm, palmOne, PalmSource, etc.
