Title: DRM I'm Content With
Date: 2006-08-28 17:00
Author: Eric
Category: Opinion
Slug: drm-im-content-with
Status: published

I don't generally buy music or ebooks online, even though I would like
to. I just can't bear the restrictive copy protection that comes
attached with online purchases. In fact, I get angry as I think about
the experiences I've had with DRM, and the ever encroaching control that
content owners leverage with it. So I was surprised to discover a use of
DRM that I'm actually not too bothered by.<!--more-->

One of my first experiences with DRM was with a CD stuffed full of
ebooks. While I can still get to them, I have to use the provider's
proprietary software to do so. Sure, the software has great searching
and some other nice features, but what if I want a book on my Pocket PC
so I can take it with me? No luck. Also, the company that produced the
CD is no longer in business, so there are no updates to the software.
How long will it be before the software becomes incompatible with a
newer version of Windows, and I have to resort to using a virtual PC to
use it? Just give me the content. I'm not going to post it all to the
internet.

Another experience was with [Audible.com](http://www.audible.com). My
family and I were about to take a cross-country road trip, and I decided
to buy an audio book of *Where the Red Fern Grows* for my boys to listen
to as we drove. Again you have to use Audible.com's really lousy media
player. If my wife wanted to listen to the book on her Palm, she had to
install their lousy media player there, too. There's all kinds of device
registration crud to wade through as well (which is horribly broken if
you try to use multiple Windows XP user accounts). The dumb thing is, in
spite of all the protections, they let you burn the content to regular
audio CDs *with no DRM at all*. I did that, then ripped the six CDs back
to MP3 so I could have a single CD. The difference between six CDs and
one is significant when you've got four people in a Honda Civic for
three days. Just give me the MP3s and save yourself the trouble of
writing lame and limiting media players, and save me the trouble of
burning seven CDs when I only want one.

There are some places where you can get legal, DRM-free songs. I don't
listen to classical music as much as I once did, but
[eclassical](http://www.eclassical.com) is a great source from which
I've bought some music. Some artists give away tracks on their sites, or
sell them for a reasonable price. I've gotten such stuff from
[Moosebutter](http://www.moosebutter.com), [Norah
Jones](http://www.norahjones.com/), [John
Schmidt](http://www.jonschmidt.com/catalog/index.php), and others.
There's also [BeatPick](http://www.beatpick.com/), where you can not
only buy music, you can then use it royalty-free for non-commercial
projects, like as a soundtrack to a video.

There are lots of great articles about the perils of DRM, and especially
the [DMCA](http://www.eff.org/IP/DMCA/), on the [Electronic Frontier
Foundation](http://www.eff.org/) site. There's so much good stuff there
I can't hope to argue so well and as deep. But there's one argument I've
heard about DRM that brings me back to the usage I'm content with. Some
say that purchasing content with DRM is really just renting it, with an
undisclosed rental period. A case in point is my ebook collection
heading toward technical obsolescence.

So what if you *are* just renting content? Renting it for free, in fact?
My city's library has an arrangement with
[NetLibrary](http://netlibrary.com/) wherein, after registering at the
physical library, I can download audio books for free. The books have
DRM that expires the content after the check-out period is up. I
downloaded a Pimsleur language course audio book so I could brush up on
my Portuguese. Foi difí­cil? Claro que não! It works just like a
library, but a lot more convenient. And if it takes DRM for that to be
workable, well I can live with that.

I had a little trouble with my hard drive a couple of weeks ago. Some
kind of fairly serious hiccup. It is limping along reasonably well
again, but there have been a few files damaged. I just went to play some
[Ryan Shupe and the Rubberband](http://www.ryanshupe.com/) and
discovered that it wouldn't play because of a licensing problem.

Probably another casualty of the hard drive problems. No worries,
though, because of course I backed up the license files. I navigate the
UI and click on the Manage Licenses dialog's **Restore Now...** button.
Time to worry. WMP can't restore backed-up licenses either.

If I had bought this music as a download, I'd be pretty much outta luck.
I got it courtesy of a Capitol Records CD, though, just one that
unfortunately is
[copy-protected](http://www.wikihow.com/Rip-Content-Protected-Cds-Without-Using-the-Bundled-Software).
Here's what it says in tiny print on the back of the jewel case:

> This product limits your ability to make multiple digital copies of
> its content, and you will not be able to play this disc or make copies
> onto devices not listed as compatible. In rare cases you may
> experience difficulties with compatible devices. This product is
> provided AS IS, without any warranties. You bear the entire risk as to
> the quality and performance of this product; if this product is
> defective or results in damage to your property, you assume the entire
> cost of repair.

Doesn't that just make you feel happy to be a Capitol customer?
