Title: Eric's Toolset
Date: 2013-05-06 17:18
Author: Eric
Category: Project
Slug: erics-toolset
Status: published

These are some of my favorite software utilities for development and life in
general. Everything listed here is free.

### IDEs

[**PyCharm Community
Edition**](http://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/download/) (JetBrains) - A
feature-rich IDE and debugger for Python built on the IntelliJ platform,
with the free community edition having arrived in 2013.

### Windows

[**Notepad2**](http://www.flos-freeware.ch/notepad2.html) (Florian
Balmer) - This is a notepad replacement that adds some nice features,
like syntax highlighting, the ability to open large files, and many
more. It's not a whole friggin' IDE, though, so it retains the lightness
of the original notepad. If you get and run the installer download, it
will automatically replace the Windows notepad.

[**Cmder**](http://bliker.github.io/cmder/) - A replacement for the
Windows Command Prompt. If you split your time between Windows and
Linux, this will add joy to your life. It includes the common \*nix
utilities, like `ls, cat, tail, grep, curl, git`, etc. by virtue of
including msysgit. It also supports ANSI color codes. There are (still,
I think, as of early 2015) occasional glitches when it will become
briefly unresponsive, and sometimes performance problems when running in
a VM, but still totally recommended.

### Regular Expressions

[**regex tester**](https://regex101.com) (regular expressions 101) - A
great browser-based regular expression tool with specific support for
PHP, Javascript and Python. There's also a community-created collection
of regular expressions.

[**Regular Expression
Designer**](http://www.radsoftware.com.au/regexdesigner/) (Rad Software)
- This is a downloadable utility to test .NET regular expressions. There
are many such utilities out there, but unlike some, this one you can
actually figure out how to use it by just looking at it. There's also a
handy reference in the right pane.

### Decompilers

[**ILSpy**](http://wiki.sharpdevelop.net/ILSpy.ashx) (SharpDevelop) -
Most people weren't too happy with .NET Reflector's free version poison
pill. This is a free alternative.

[**dotPeek**](http://www.jetbrains.com/decompiler/) (JetBrains) -
Another .NET Reflector alternative, in "early access". I haven't used
this one yet, but stuff from JetBrains tends to be solid.

[**JD-GUI**](http://java.decompiler.free.fr/?q=jdgui) (Emmanuel Dupuy) -
A Java decompiler that is pretty simple and works well.

### Misc. Python Tools

[**virtualenvwrapper**](http://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.org/en/latest/)
(Doug Hellmann) - virtualenv is great, virtualenvwrapper makes it even
better by simplifying the process of creating and switching between
virtual environments.

[**virtualenvwrapper-win**](https://github.com/davidmarble/virtualenvwrapper-win/)
(David Marble) - Windows port of virtualenvwrapper.

