Title: Microsoft's CD Replacement Policy
Date: 2005-03-03 17:00
Author: Eric
Slug: microsofts-cd-replacement-policy
Status: published

I noticed a while back that my *[Rise of
Nations](http://www.microsoft.com/games/riseofnations/)* game CD had a
big crack through it. This was likely owing to it being on the floor in
close proximity to the wheels of the chair at the boys' computer. Any
hopes that it might still be readable were quickly dispelled when
Windows Explorer locked up in the attempt. I figured Microsoft might
have some kind of replacement policy, and in fact they do. What I didn't
realize is that their policy was carefully crafted for
stupidity.<!--more-->

My first stop at getting a replacement disk was at a knowledge base
article entitled [Games That Require That the Original Product CD Is in
the CD-ROM Drive to
Play](http://support.microsoft.com/default.aspx?scid=kb;en-us;243258).
There, aside from a friendly note that circumventing the copy protection
on the CD is illegal, was a number to call to get a replacement CD. I
started to wonder what they would charge me... fifty cents for
materials, a couple of bucks for postage... it can't be more than five
bucks, and that might be worth it.

After some phone menu navigation and a transfer, I talked to Joanne. I
told her I'd like to see about replacing my CD -- kids destroyed it and
all -- and would that be possible? Sure, she says, but there's a fee for
that. It will be \$23.95 for the disk plus \$5.00 for shipping plus tax.
I was sort of speechless.

"I think that's probably more than the game is worth," I finally
managed.

"Yeah, probably," she replied.

"I guess I'm out of luck then."

"No, I can replace it for you for \$23.95."

"Um, no thanks."

I had a look on Amazon, where the game is selling new for \$17.99.
Even on Microsoft's own site the game sells for \$19.99. Are they
serious? I had to call back.

This time I talked to Kristin. I explained that I had just called in a
few minutes ago, and wanted to verify that I'd gotten the story
straight. I wasn't mad at this point, just fascinated by the absurdity.
She confirmed the cost. I also had her clarify that the replacement
would be just the disk, not a completely new retail package.

"That seems kind of strange considering Microsoft sells the game on
their web site for just \$19.99," I pointed out.

Kristin noted that they would gladly replace the disk for free if it had
been defective. That's fine, and I fully recognize that I'm to blame
here for having let the disk get broken.

I went over my "not more than five bucks" cost estimate with her. I
don't have the distorted view that software's primary cost is the disk
on which it is distributed, but I had already paid for the development
and marketing of the game when I bought it the first time.

I asked Kristin if I, hypothetically, wanted to order the replacement,
she would actually sell it to me. She said that the service reps are
*supposed* to recommend just buying a new copy of the game since it is
cheaper.

So there you have it. Microsoft's replacement strategy is to sell you
the same game you've already bought, or charge even more if you happen
to be slightly clueless about market value.

I've heard that the Gold Edition of *Rise of Nations* is pretty good.
Maybe I'll have to pick up a copy so I can play the game again. After
all, it's cheaper than the replacement.
