Title: The NSA Questions My Lifestyle
Date: 2010-06-17 20:04
Author: Eric
Category: Story
Slug: nsa-polygraph-test
Status: published

The National Security Agency (NSA) has a
[video](http://dssa.dss.mil/seta/broadcast_news/video_resources/polygraph_flash.html)
about their polygraph testing, which was critiqued by
[AntiPolygraph.org](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=93_FDeMENN4), and
recently [reported about on
Slashdot](http://science.slashdot.org/story/10/06/13/2049211/The-Truth-About-the-Polygraph-According-To-the-NSA).
In 1991, while still a college student, I applied for a summer
internship with the NSA, so I got to take one of these tests myself. The
official results were "inconclusive", but I think they suspected that I
was secretly gay.

<!--more-->
So what drew me to the NSA? Two words: *computers* and
*spies*. The recruiter told me that they had lots of fascinating jobs
for brilliant computer scientists, but couldn't tell me what they were
since they were all classified. Still, *computers* and *spies*. And OK,
they were going to *pay me*, which seemed like a really cool prospect.

I also got a free trip to Maryland for interviews and screening. For
example, there was a psychological evaluation wherein they used sly and
subtle questions to determine if I was suffering from some psychotic
disorder, like "True or False: People are out to get me" and "True or
False: I think Nixon was a good president."

For one portion of the interview, I was escorted into a real working NSA
building at Fort Meade. There were red flashing siren lights on the
ceiling and lots of people scurrying about yelling things like, "Red
badge in the area!"Â  It was all pretty exciting -- what kind of crisis
could possibly be underway? Then I realized that it was all because of
me. A "red badge" is a visitor without a security clearance, and they
had to be sure no one accidentally disclosed the location of the secret
box from *Sneakers* or something.

The polygraph test was pretty much like they say in the NSA video. They
tell you word-for-word what all of the questions will be in advance, and
they are all yes or no questions. The questions are in one of two
categories: (1) stuff they already know, and (2) stuff they want to
know. In the first category are things like my name and address -- that
is, "Is your name Eric James Smith?" These are all to be answered "yes",
and set a baseline. Stuff they want to know includes things like whether
I've used illegal drugs, if I intend to divulge classified information
to foreign spies, and whether I've engaged in any adult homosexual
activity.

Early in the test, the examiner asked me if I lived at such and such
address, to which I honestly replied, "No". There was a little confused
silence that I wasn't allowed to remedy since I was just supposed to
answer the questions. Eventually he figured out that he had read my
address wrong. After that, things went pretty smoothly.

"Have you engaged in espionage against the United States?"

"No."

"Have you engaged in any adult homosexual activity?"

"No."

"Is your name Eric James Smith?"

"Yes."

And so on. Most of the questions were repeated a few times. The one
about homosexuality seemed to be coming up a lot. After answering it
truthfully several times, it came up yet again. *Oh my gosh! He thinks
I'm gay!!!* Somehow a simple yes or no question, when repeated enough
times, starts to sound like an accusation. It's like, "I don't believe
your last response, so let me give you another chance. The truth this
time!" Did I have some kind of physiological response on that one? I'm
surprised the machine didn't burst into flames like in *[The
Simpsons](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bjyCY7Qi8ic)*. Even though I'm
not secretly/openly/questionably gay, I'm sure there was a big spike on
the chart when I suddenly thought that *he* thought I was lying.

Here's a copy of the official polygraph report, which I got by filing a
FOIA request several years later (gray redactions mine, black redactions
theirs):

[![Polygraph report]({filename}/images/polygraph-small.jpg)]({filename}/images/polygraph.jpg)

In the end, I didn't get the job. Maybe it was because I had lived at 15
different addresses in three countries over the previous five years,
along with travel to three additional countries, and nobody wanted to
background check all of that for an intern. Maybe I wasn't a brilliant
enough computer scientist. Or maybe they just didn't trust that my
lifestyle was in-bounds.
