Title: My Favorite Podcasts 2019
Date: 2019-09-28 14:40
Author: Eric
Category: Review
Tags: Podcast
Slug: podcasts-2019
Status: published

After working at home for a couple of years, it was hard to get back in the car
every morning to commute after changing jobs. I'm lucky that it isn't *that*
far, but it still felt like a monumental waste of time to be stuck in traffic.
Podcasts have redeemed my commute, helping me learn some things as I drive.
These are the Podcasts that I currently subscribe to, alphabetically, in either
technical or non-technical categories.

## Technical

### [Hanselminutes](https://www.hanselminutes.com/)

![Hanselminutes]({static}/images/podcasts-2019-hanselminutes.jpg){: width="150" }

Scott Hanselman is a veteran podcaster, and a great interviewer. He makes a
deliberate effort to have guests that are in demographics less well represented
in the tech community. Most of the episodes are programming related, but there
are some that are just things Scott and his techie audience are interested in,
and some of my favorites have been when he invites his "non-technical spouse"
on to talk about life.

### [Podcast.\_\_init\_\_](https://www.pythonpodcast.com/)

![Podcast.__init__]({static}/images/podcasts-2019-podcast-init.jpg){: width="150" }

This Python podcast is hosted by Tobias Macey and covers Python projects and
Python community members doing interesting things. Many episodes focus on data
science, and Tobias even started a separate podcast just on data engineering.
As an interviewer, Tobias is not the strongest. Sometimes his questions seem to
go on and on, and his vocal tone is a bit flat, but he's a smart guy and often
has interesting episodes.

### [PythonBytes](https://pythonbytes.fm/)

![PythonBytes]({static}/images/podcasts-2019-python-bytes.png){: width="150" }

Since this is a Python news podcast, I have my podcast app put this show at the
front of the queue as soon as it comes out. It is hosted by Michael Kennedy and
Brian Okken, who individually host other podcasts in my list. It is a great way
to keep up on news in the Python community and hear about interesting articles
that have been published.

### [Software Engineering Radio](https://www.se-radio.net/)

![Software Engineering Radio]({static}/images/podcasts-2019-se-radio.jpg){: width="150" }

Surprisingly *not* a Python-specific podcast, SE Radio is produced by the
people at the *IEEE Software* technical magazine. There are a number of hosts,
and subjects are wide and varied. These episodes tend to be on the longer-side,
often over an hour, and can be a bit hit-or-miss for me. Occasionally a guest
will stray into promoting their project/company, but I suppose that's a fair
trade-off for getting an expert's time. I like this one for broad exposure
to tools and techniques in the industry.

### [Talk Python To Me](https://talkpython.fm/?utm_source=pythonbytes)

![Talk Python To Me]({static}/images/podcasts-2019-talk-python.png){: width="150" }

Michael Kennedy is another great interviewer, because his episodes are
*conversations* with his guests. They flow naturally, often have a touch of
humor, and are on interesting subjects. Michael is an unapologetic champion of
Python, and I share his opinion of the language being the first thing to reach
for in so many situations.

### [Test and Code](https://testandcode.com/?utm_source=pythonbytes)

![Test and Code{@height=100}]({static}/images/podcasts-2019-test-and-code.jpg){: width="150" }

I really enjoy writing automated tests, and think a lot about how to do so
better, so it is interesting to listen to this podcast to get some different
perspectives. I have to say that the early episodes were pretty awkward, but
Brian Okken has come *miles* from where he started. I suspect some of that
improvement comes from working closely with Michael Kennedy.

## Non-Technical

### [The Art of Manliness](https://www.artofmanliness.com/podcast/)

![The Art of Manliness]({static}/images/podcasts-2019-art-of-manliness.jpg){: width="150" }

Brett McKay hosts this show aimed at elevating manhood. His typical episode is
an interview with an author of a recently published book on a subject fitting
his theme, including subjects like leadership, military history, philosophy,
finances, fitness, social skills and more.

### [FairMormon](https://www.fairmormon.org/media/fairmormon-podcasts)

![FairMormon]({static}/images/podcasts-2019-fair-mormon.jpg){: width="150" }

These "episodes" are normally recordings of talks given at the annual
FairMormon Conference, where scholars and other experts defend and give
insights into the doctrines and history of The Church of Jesus-Christ of
Latter-day Saints.

### [Hardcore History](https://www.dancarlin.com/hardcore-history-series/)

![Hardcore History]({static}/images/podcasts-2019-hardcore-history.jpg){: width="150" }

You're in for the long haul when *Hardcore History* comes up in your queue --
episodes often span multiple hours. The host, Dan Carlin, will be the first to
say that he isn't a historian, more a journalist researching the past. Unlike
many podcasts, this is pure narration as opposed to interviews, and the results
are fascinating.

### [Moonshot](https://moonshot.audio/)

![Moonshot]({static}/images/podcasts-2019-moonshot.jpg){: width="150" }

This is a podcast about big, audacious ideas and the people pursuing them.
Topics have included self-driving cars, artificial meat and cryptocurrencies.
The subjects are presented for a broad audience, so they give you something to
think about as opposed to diving too much into the technical details.

### [This American Life](https://www.thisamericanlife.org/)

![This American Life]({static}/images/podcasts-2019-tal.jpg){: width="150" }

A public radio staple, *This American Life* tells (usually) true stories on
some episode-specific theme. This is one of the few podcasts on my list that my
wife is willing to listen to. The stories are usually great. Maybe it is my
imagination but it seems like the plight of immigrants in the U.S. has gotten
an excessive amount of coverage lately. There are some musical themes that go
along with the stories, too. I wonder if the producers have names for them and
say, "OK, cue the 'This is kinda crazy' music" or "Time to play the 'pensive'
music".
