Title: PyCon 2016 - Day 3
Date: 2016-06-01 12:51
Author: Eric
Category: Event
Tags: Python
Slug: pycon-2016-day-3
Status: published

Wednesday was the final day of the main PyCon 2016 conference in
Portland, Oregon.

![Pioneer Square]({static}/images/pycon-pioneer.jpg)

Lightning talks
---------------

One of the interesting talks was about Web accessibility. It isn't
always top-of-mind for me since I do little Web front end currently, but
the speaker mentioned the [Accessibility Developer Tools for Google
Chrome](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/accessibility-developer-t/fpkknkljclfencbdbgkenhalefipecmb?hl=en),
which seem pretty cool in helping you develop a site complying with the
WCAG standards.

There were also still more Turtle Graphics (having come up a few times
at the conference) for education. I only mention this because the
presenter also talked about *[How to Think Like a Computer
Scientist](http://interactivepython.org/courselib/static/thinkcspy/index.html)*,
which I've wanted to look at more in depth at some point.

Python Software Foundation - Van Lindberg
-----------------------------------------

Van Lindberg is the chair of the PSF. After mentioning some awards given
to members of the Python community, he encouraged everyone to read a
[post by Donald Stufft about how PyPI stays
up](https://caremad.io/2016/05/powering-pypi/). Spolier: it is not
magic. There's also a place to donate: https://donate.pypi.io.

The bulk of Van's talk was about the recent court decision between
Google and Oracle about using Java in Android. Google wins. Yay? Hard to
say. If Google had lost, Van argued, Android would have experienced an
extinction event. But winning possibly doesn't set any useful precedent,
and potentially clouds legal protections of open software.

Keynote - Cris Ewing
--------------------

Cris is lead developer for the University of Washington department of
Radiology Web Services team. He came to talk about Plone. He gave some
history about the Z Object Publishing Environment (ZOPE), and the Plone
CMS built on it. Apparently Plone was pretty cool a while back, and
helped promote Python as a web language. The talk was kind of a deep
dive into design patterns being used to untangle what has apparently
become quite a mess. Maybe Plone is becoming something more bearable
now? I'm not sure.

Poster Session
--------------

Next up was the poster session and job fair. There were a variety of
small-scale presentations about esoteric scientific topics, libraries,
initiatives, and other topics. I didn't get a ton of value from those,
but they were generally packed, so apparently lots of people did. One
think I want to look at more:
[PyKMIP](https://github.com/OpenKMIP/PyKMIP).

I'd also estimate around 50 companies with recruiting booths dispensing
swag. Some examples: Quora, Netflix, Hulu, HP, Microsoft, Demonware,
Disney, Textura, Mail Chimp, Survey Monkey, Amazon, Bank of America and
Intel.

Write an excellent programming blog - A. Jesse Jiryu Davies
-----------------------------------------------------------

This was a well-done talk about writing. I'm definitely a person who
thinks by writing, which is one of the main reasons that I do this blog.
Occasionally I might have something worth sharing, or at least
remembering as well.

Jesse covered the typical forms of posts on a blog (though he prefers
"essay" or "article" rather than "post"), and shared a good example of
each. He said not to feel like you have to write all the time -- just
when you have something to say. He also recommended having an editor --
even if that's a friend who will read and give feedback on drafts. My
wife, who has a journalism degree, is usually my editor, but less so for
the technical things I post here. It would be good to involve her more
because I know things are better with her help.

See also: <https://bit.ly/excellent-blog>.

Small batch artisanal bots: Let's make friends - Elizabeth Uselton
------------------------------------------------------------------

A great project for developing skills in programming is to build a bot
that posts to Twitter or some chat system. Liz gave a list of fun and
interesting bots that people have written for Twitter ranging from one
that corrects people's grammar, to ones that merge posts by people
describing the effects of psychedelic drugs with posts by job
recruiters.

She also talked about how to get started using the Twitter API, that
bots are more interesting when they have data to work with, and using
the [Natural Language Toolkit](http://www.nltk.org/).

There was a little mention of Markov chains, which is one of those
things that I hear about occasionally, look up to remember what it is,
then forget again. But for whatever reason, it kind of clicked for me
that this must be how the SwiftKey keyboard works, so maybe it will
stick in my head now. And being a Python conference, it also reminded me
of [this](http://www.montypython.net/scripts/word-ass.php) (or [audio
version](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8WrDAoXXvw0)).

Revitalizing Python game development - Jacob Kovac
--------------------------------------------------

This was a talk about the [Kivy](https://kivy.org/#home) app framework
and the [KivEnt](http://kivent.org/) graphics engine that goes with it,
by the author of the latter. I've looked at Kivy for a little side
project I started... (need to get back to that sometime). The talk also
addressed deploying Python applications, and there is a project for that
called ["buildozer"](http://buildozer.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).
Currently, however, it targets mobile platforms, and Jacob uses
PyInstaller for desktop (though the other usual suspects, like
cx\_Freeze, were mentioned). Desktop platforms are on the roadmap,
however.

![PyCon Sign]({static}/images/pycon-oregon.jpg)


Some PyCon facts
----------------

Total participants this year: 3,209\
Percentage of women speakers: 40%\
Site for next year: Portland again (they do two years at each place)\
Site for 2018-19: Cleveland, OH

Final Keynote - K. Lars Lohn
----------------------------

Lars, from Mozilla, gave a fascinating talk weaving live music
performance (Vivaldi), motorcycle video, and talk of programming, math,
topography, Native American culture, and most of all, complexity and how
it is measured.

I'd just recommend [watching it on
YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bSfe5M_zG2s) since I can't
really do it justice here.
