Title: SaintCon
Date: 2018-11-04 21:07
Author: Ethan
Category: Event
Slug: saintcon-2018
Status: draft



Saintcon was cool, here’s some stuff I did :
(add what is saintcon here )

Classes
-------

Classes were cool, one in particular I liked, because we won a book( and also
because it was cool) was a presentation about following the breadcrumbs and
digging a little deeper. The presenter talked about how it’s always good to dig
a little deeper, and do some extra research into things even when they at first
appear to be benign. During his presentation there was some ascii code on his
slides, which at first we assumed was decoration, but it kept growing longer
every slide, until the end, when the presenter took it off the screen and said,
in spirit with digging a little deeper he had hidden something in his slides,
and the first person to tweet at him would win a copy of the “Blue Team’s Field
Manual” which sounded pretty cool to me and my co-woker, so we got to work on
that. The hardest part of the challenge was actually finding a copy of the
slides so we could get the message, as he hadn’t ever linked to them, or told
us where to get them, but because the talk was streamed live on twitch.tv ( a
video livestreaming site) we were able to get a still frame of the slides. From
there it was relatively simple to translate the ascii into English, and then
decode the base64 encryption on the message. We ended up taking home the book.

Another talk I really liked was one of the keynotes, which was put on by the
:NeverLAN” CTF team, which is a team of college kids who started their own
business putting on virtual “CTF” capture the flag events.(Talk more about
this? ) They talked about how they got started in cybersecurity, and how they
like to set up ctf challenges. This was a really cool thing to hear about
because I am currently in a similar situation to where they are. I am the vice
president of SUU’s Cybersecurity club, and so I am in charge of ( with the
other club leaders) planning weekley meetings to teach students about different
topics in cybersecurity. The NeverLAN guys talked about a lot of great points
that we will be able to merge into our own ctf’s in the future. I especially
liked how they talked giving hints that might allow a knowledgeable person to
google something that would help them learn the solution without actually
telling them specifically what to do, or what to search.

There were lots of other talks, as they went on for the entire duration of the
conference, but some weren’t as memorable, or applicable to me, and some were a
little misleading, like the “introduction to Bash” talk, in which the presenter
said “ This is an intro to bash scripting( which is a type of programming), but
I expect you already will have a deep working knowedge of C programming, and
here are the ways bash is different from C, and he then went into a lot of
detail about bash that I didn’t fully understand, so that was not quite what I
expected.

But besides the talks there was lots of other things that kept my attention at
SaintCon. Besides the talks there are lots of more Hands On things to do while
you’re there, like the Red V Blue challenge.

Red vs blue
-----------

In a RedVBlue challenge one team (RED) tries to hack into some specific
computer systems, while the other team (BLUE) tries to defend the systems, and
detect the intruders. I got to run the challenge on the blue team, which was
cool. The challenge itself was pretty structured, with the administrators
giving us access to some IDS (intrusion detection software) and pointing us in
the right direction as to where attacks might come from. Then our job as blue
team was to find out everything about the attack that we could ( like what IP
address it came from, where the hackers got into, and what they had access to)
and create a report of what happened, which is similar to how something like
this might happen in the real world. It was really cool to see what kind of
things they wanted us to focus on, and it gave a good example for if we ever
get hacked in the real world ( which we won't )


lockpicking
-----------

Another thing that was pretty neat was the lockpicking section. There were some
tables set up, with a whole bunch of locks, and lockpicks on them. It was fun
to learn more about the physical security side of things, and it feels really
good to crack a lock open without the key! By the time the conference was
finishing up on Friday all the picks had been worn flat, from being constantly
used to pick locks for 10+ hours a day all week, which made it a bit harder to
do.

Another big difference between this conference and other conferences I’ve been
to in the past was the badge. Most Conferences have just a standard paper or
plastic ID badge, showing that you’re allowed to be there. But saintcon, ( and
other big-name security conferences) have something really cool and different :
a DIY electronic badge (insert picture here). When you arrive they give you a
kit, and point you toward the “hardware hacking village” where there are a ton
of soldering irons and other useful tools for putting them together. It’s a
great opportunity to learn for the first time, or to improve your skills with
soldering, and in addition, the chip that powers the badge can be hacked to do
all sorts of different things, like display different lettering on the badge,
or even repurposed for something else completely.

Hackers challenge
-----------------

The final, really big thing that I participated in was the “Hackers Challenge”.
The basic idea behind the challenge is that there can be downtime between
talks, or at lunchtime, or whenever, and the organizers of the convention
wanted something for people to do, so they created a bunch of technical
challenges, ranging from simple cryptography, all the way to interactive remote
systems to attack, with the goal being to find flags, or hidden strings of
text, like this “flag = {WhatAGreatFlag}” and redeeming them in the web portal.
I went into the convention thinking that I would check the challenges out, but
that they would probably go a bit over my head. But in the end I think I spent
more time on the challenges, (including time outside of convention hours) than
I did on any other single event. Like I mentioned there were some really simple
challenges, like a Caesar shift cipher, that anyone could get ( and a lot of
people did), all the way to some crazy stuff like copying a protected directory
into a docker container, and viewing the contents of that directory there.
There were some password cracking challenges that forced me to try out some new
software, and gave me a better understanding of what makes a good password, and
there was some reverse engineering, and packet sniffing challenges that proved
to me that I really don’t know much about reverse engineering or networking
sniffing. It was really a great experience to get to try to break into machines
in a hands-on environment, and the challenges were really well polished, and
fun to attempt.


Home stuff/UVU
--------------

As luck would have it, Utah Valley University happened to decide that the
weekend after Saintcon would be a good time to host a
