Title: Review of "The Body: A Guide for Occupants"
Date: 2020-04-12 20:15
Author: Eric
Category: Review
Slug: the-body
Status: published

![Book Cover]({static}/images/the-body.jpg)

Douglas Crockford, in *JavaScript: The Good Parts* said, “Computer programs are
the most complex things that humans make.” As someone who builds software, that
idea can make you feel pretty good about your intellectual place in the world,
because even though I don't know how lots of software works, I feel like I
could probably at least *figure it out*. After reading *The Body: A Guide for
Occupants* by Bill Bryson, though, I've come to the humbling realization that
one of the most complex things *ever* made is humans.

The book is an overview of how our bodies work, and the circuitous routes
doctors and scientists have taken to come to that understanding. What is
abundantly clear, however, is how much there is yet to learn. If you're an
aspiring scientist in search of unanswered questions, the human body is full of
them. "Nobody knows," was a pretty common refrain in the book. In some cases,
there are scientifically untested ideas and assumptions, but history is
littered with people who were tragically wrong, inflicting unnecessary
suffering and even death on people they were trying to help.

George Washington, for example, after coming down with what might have been a
bad cold or throat infection in 1799 was treated by doctors who bled him,
induced vomiting, and performed other deleterious procedures until he was dead.
More horrific, and much more recent, was Walter Freeman performing lobotomies
in the 1940's and 1950's, basically by hammering an ice pick into people's
brains and wiggling it around. This was a treatment for anyone "with almost any
kind of perceived mental or social aberration" including phobias (p. 66).

Some pioneers in physiology and medicine were soundly ridiculed for
preposterous theories that later turned out to be correct, earning their
authors Nobel Prizes after the scientific community came around many years
later. It goes to show that sometimes distinguishing between horrible and
brilliant ideas is harder than you'd think.

In addition to describing the functions of the body and history, the book also
does a fair amount of myth-busting. I've known that the recommendation to drink
eight glasses of water per day is bogus for quite a while, but I had read
recently that thirst is a much better and simpler indication of how much to
drink. Also apparently bogus, according to Bryson: "Thirst, curiously, is not a
reliable indication of how much water you need. People allowed to drink all the
water they want after getting very thirsty usually report feeling slaked after
drinking only one-fifth the amount they have lost through perspiration" (p.
238).

In taking care of our bodies, Bryson makes the observation that, "Roughly 40
percent of people with diabetes, chronic hypertension, or cardiovascular
disease were fit as a fiddle before they got ill, and roughly 20 percent of
people who are severely overweight live to a ripe old age without ever doing
anything about it. Just because you exercise regularly and eat a lot of salad
doesn't mean you have bought yourself a better life span. What you have bought
is a better chance of having a better life span" (p. 247). But clearly the
chances are pretty significant if 80 percent of people severely overweight
*didn't* live to a ripe old age.

One minor thing I didn't like so much was the way references were done. When
encountering something surprising, I would have liked to have looked at the
sources, but there is no indication in the text where some information comes
from. Instead, the Notes on Sources are at the end of the book, with page
number references back into the text, but it is often hard to align the note
with the precise section of text to which it applies.

Overall the book was fascinating and enjoyable to read, though in keeping with
its theme, almost certainly wrong in some respects that we've yet to discover.
